
# Customer segmentation analysis for perk allocation
## Table of Contents
- Project Description
- Tools
- Usage
- Project Structure
- Data analysis and Results
- Contact

## Project Description
### Inrtoduction
In any business, understanding the customer behaviour is an important component. In business companies like TravelTide to retain their customers and make them buy regularly, they need to understand their customers behaviour and allocate perks.

### Specific Objectives

Segment customers into distinct categories based on their previous trip booking history using unsupervised learning models.

Allocate a perk for each segment based on their unique behaviour

### Significance
The project has a significance of identifying the specific behaviour of customers and sending adverts for booking tailored to the need of each customer. 


## Screenshoots
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1QaUdeENnKR1IZLDIYr_-Ioc3K5_pm1nI/view?usp=share_link

## Tools
Google colab, 
Excel for perk analysis, 
Beekeper Studio,
SQLAlchemy to connect to the Postgress database,
SQL, 
Panda, 
Numpy for analysis,
correlation matrix
Plotly express, 
seaborn, 
matplotlib for data visualization
MinMaxScaler, 
PCA, 
silhouette_score, 
KMeans, 
GaussianMixture
## Usage

To reproduce the code, run the googlecolab notebook file TravelTide_project_final.ipynb file in the Github TravelTide_perk_project. 


## Project Structure
- Notebook/: A googlecolab notebook with an active code.
- Customer_segments/: Contianins the lists of all customers segmented based on their behaviout using the gaussianMixture model.
- Perk_allocation_per_segment/: An excel file that contains the analysis for perk allocation. The unique behaviour of each segment is described.
- TravelTide_project/: a powerpoint file that contains the major findings of the analysis for presentation to stakeholders.
- README.md/: file that outlines the project
## Data Analysis and Results
### Libraries
- Libraries required for analysis such as numpy, pandas, GaussianMixture etc have been imported.
### Data
- The TraveTide flight and booking data is dowloaded from the postgress database. A data cohort from 4th of January 2023 till the 27th of July 2023 was selected for analysis. 
### Data Pre-processing
- The users who have never booked a trip have been excluded from the analysis.
- The null values for numerical features were filled with 0  
- The abscence of duplicated recordings were examined.
- The user base data was generated by aggregating the numericla fields and counting string data types.
- More than 22 metrics have been generated as input for clustering anaysis.
- Rules were set to classify customers. 
- The 22 metrics were scaled to with in 0 and 1 using the MinMaxScaler algorithm.
## Analysis Results
- The number of features were reduced by using PCA.
- The optimum number of clusters was identified using Silhouette Score.
- Two clustering algorithms KMeans and GaussianMixture (GM) were evaluated.
- The six segmentations that resulted from GM was used to group customers.
- The segments were characterized for unique features based on the rules set in place.  
## Visualization
- The segments were visualized by using plotly express
- The segments unique features were described using bargraphs and piecharts on googlesheet. 
## Authors

- [@derewor](https://github.com/derewor/TravelTide_Customer_Segmentation_projecte)

